.TH SHDEPS 1 "2026-04-15" "shdeps 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
shdeps \- declarative shell dependency manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shdeps
.RI [ options ]
.I command
.RI [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shdeps
reads declarative config files and installs or updates shell tools via
system package managers, GitHub repos, GitHub release binaries, or
fully custom hooks.
Dependencies are declared in
.B *.conf
files within a config directory (default:
.IR ~/.config/shdeps/ ).
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B update
Install or update all configured dependencies.
.TP
.B self\-update
Update shdeps itself by pulling the latest from its git repository.
Skips the update if the local tree has uncommitted changes.
.TP
.B list
List all configured dependencies with columns for name, method, status,
and version details.
.TP
.BI check " name"
Check whether a specific dependency is installed.
Exits 0 if installed, 1 if not.
.TP
.B prune
Remove orphaned dependencies that are no longer present in any config file.
Accepts
.B \-y
to skip the confirmation prompt and
.B \-\-dry\-run
to preview what would be removed.
.TP
.B version
Print the shdeps version string.
.TP
.B help
Show the built-in help message.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIpath\fR
Config directory or file.
If a file is given, its parent directory is used.
Default:
.IR ~/.config/shdeps/ .
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Bypass the TTL cache and check for updates immediately.
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-reinstall
Force reinstall all dependencies.
Implies
.BR \-\-force .
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress interactive prompts.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output (log level 2).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the help message.
.SS Prune options
.TP
.B \-y
Skip the confirmation prompt during prune.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be removed without actually removing anything.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Config files use a whitespace-delimited format.
All
.B *.conf
files in the config directory are loaded, sorted alphabetically.
Lines starting with
.B #
are comments.
.PP
.RS
.nf
# name       method           [cmd]  [cmd_alt]  [source]                 [platforms]  [hosts]
jq           pkg
bat          pkg              bat    batcat
fd           pkg              fd     fdfind     apt:fd-find,dnf:fd-find
ds           github:repo      \-     \-         cgraf78/ds.git
neovim       github:release   nvim   \-         neovim/neovim
dust         pkg              \-     \-         \-                       macos
htop         pkg              \-     \-         \-                       \-           nas
nerd-fonts   custom
.fi
.RE
.SS Fields
.TP
.B name
Required.
Identifier for the dependency.
.TP
.B method
Required.
One of
.BR pkg ", " github:repo ", " github:release ", or " custom .
.TP
.B cmd
Command name to check for.
Defaults to
.IR name .
Use
.B \-
to keep the default.
.TP
.B cmd_alt
Alternate command name (e.g.,
.B batcat
on Debian for
.BR bat ).
.TP
.B source
For
.BR pkg :
comma-separated per-manager overrides (e.g.,
.BR apt:fd-find,dnf:fd-find ).
Use
.B NONE
to skip a specific manager.
For
.BR github:repo " and " github:release :
GitHub
.IB owner / repo
(e.g.,
.BR neovim/neovim ).
.TP
.B platforms
Comma-separated platform filter:
.BR linux ", " macos ", " wsl .
Prefix with
.B !
to exclude.
.TP
.B hosts
Comma-separated hostname filter, same syntax as platforms.
.SS Install Methods
.TP
.B pkg
Uses the detected system package manager (brew, apt, dnf, or pacman).
Batches all pkg installs into one command; retries individually on failure.
.TP
.B github:repo
Clones from GitHub.
Prefers a local dev clone in
.B $SHDEPS_GIT_DEV_DIR
if present; otherwise pulls existing clones or does a fresh shallow clone.
.TP
.B github:release
Downloads a pre-built binary from GitHub Releases.
Handles
.BR .tar.gz ", " .tar.xz ", " .tar.bz2 ", " .zip ", " .gz ", " .bz2 ", " .zst ,
and raw binaries.
.TP
.B custom
Hook-only.
Requires
.B exists()
and
.B install()
functions in the hook file.
.SH HOOKS
Hook files are sourced from
.IB $SHDEPS_HOOKS_DIR / name .sh
(default:
.IR <conf_dir>/hooks.d/ ).
They may define the following functions:
.TP
.BI exists( name )
Required for custom deps.
Return 0 if the dependency is installed.
.TP
.BI install( name )
Perform the installation.
.TP
.BI version( name )
Print a version string.
.TP
.BI post( name )
Post-install setup.
Runs after any method if the dependency changed.
.TP
.BI uninstall( name )
Cleanup during
.BR "shdeps prune" .
For custom deps this is the only cleanup path.
For github:repo/github:release deps it runs before built-in cleanup.
.SH EXTRAS LINKING
For
.B github:repo
and
.B github:release
installs, shdeps auto-discovers and symlinks man pages
and shell completions to user-local directories:
.PP
.RS
.nf
Man pages       ~/.local/share/man/man<N>/
Bash completions ~/.local/share/bash-completion/completions/
Zsh completions  ~/.local/share/zsh/site-functions/
Fish completions ~/.local/share/fish/vendor_completions.d/
.fi
.RE
.PP
Tracked per-dep in
.IR $SHDEPS_STATE_DIR/<name>.links .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SHDEPS_CONF_DIR
Config directory.
Default:
.I ~/.config/shdeps/
(CLI) or
.I ./shdeps/
(library mode).
.TP
.B SHDEPS_HOOKS_DIR
Hooks directory.
Default:
.IR <conf_dir>/hooks.d .
.TP
.B SHDEPS_STATE_DIR
State and cache directory.
Default:
.IR $XDG_STATE_HOME/shdeps .
.TP
.B SHDEPS_FORCE
Set to
.B 1
to bypass TTL cache.
.TP
.B SHDEPS_REINSTALL
Set to
.B 1
to force reinstall all deps.
.TP
.B SHDEPS_QUIET
Set to
.B 1
to suppress interactive prompts.
.TP
.B SHDEPS_REMOTE_TTL
Cache TTL in seconds.
Default: 3600.
.TP
.B SHDEPS_GIT_DEV_DIR
Dev clone directory for the github:repo method.
Default:
.IR ~/git .
.TP
.B SHDEPS_INSTALL_DIR
Base directory for github:repo and github:release installs.
Default:
.IR ~/.local/share .
.TP
.B SHDEPS_BIN_DIR
Directory for symlinks to installed binaries.
Default:
.IR ~/.local/bin .
.TP
.B SHDEPS_LOG_LEVEL
Logging verbosity: 0=quiet, 1=normal, 2=verbose.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (dependency not found, install failure, etc.).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (unknown command or missing argument).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/shdeps/*.conf
Default config files.
.TP
.I ~/.config/shdeps/hooks.d/*.sh
Hook scripts.
.TP
.I $SHDEPS_STATE_DIR/manifest
Installed dependency manifest.
.SH EXAMPLES
Install or update all dependencies:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps update
.RE
.PP
Force update, bypassing TTL cache:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps \-\-force update
.RE
.PP
Use an alternate config directory:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps \-c ~/.config/myapp/ update
.RE
.PP
List all dependencies and their status:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps list
.RE
.PP
Check if a specific dependency is installed:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps check jq
.RE
.PP
Preview orphaned dependencies without removing:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps prune \-\-dry\-run
.RE
.PP
Remove orphaned dependencies without confirmation:
.PP
.RS
.B shdeps prune \-y
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR brew (1),
.BR apt (8),
.BR dnf (8),
.BR gh (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Chris Graf
